JupyterLab user testing script and results (#10)
Quansight-Labs/JupyterLab-user-testing: results/user-testing-results.md

# Results: JupyterLab Accessibility Overview

> These results are from user interviews conducted in May 2023 with [this test script]() on [a modified version of NumPy Tutorials’ Saving and sharing your NumPy arrays notebook](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/JupyterLab-user-testing/blob/main/notebooks/save-load-arrays.ipynb). 

Reviewer: Link to test script missing here

Author: ```suggestion
These results are from user interviews conducted in May 2023 with [this test script](user-testing-script.md) on [a modified version of NumPy Tutorials’ Saving and sharing your NumPy arrays notebook](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/JupyterLab-user-testing/blob/main/notebooks/save-load-arrays.ipynb). 
```

> This work was funded by a [Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Essential Open Source Software for Science grant](https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/proposals/inclusive-and-accessible-scientific-computing-in-the-jupyter-ecosystem/). The [full grant proposal can be found on the jupyter/accessibility repository](https://github.com/jupyter/accessibility/blob/da6db43da092255c205ce1603d0d10b1f51c131b/docs/funding/Inclusive_and_Accessible_Scientific_Computing_in_Jupyter_Ecosystem_SUBMITTED_PROPOSAL.pdf).

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to move this paragraph to the bottom? in a new Acknowledgements section?

I'm also wondering if it would make sense to insert a very brief overview of the testing script and interview: 

> Participants were first asked to complete a set of tasks: to find information in a notebook, change settings in the JupyterLab UI, modify cells in a notebook, etc. Then they were interviewed about their experience completing the tasks and about JupyterLab in general. 

something like that?

Reviewer: +1 on moving this to the bottom, usually funding sources tend to go there

Author: Deleting funding notes here and adding @gabalafou's description.

```suggestion
Participants were first asked to complete a set of tasks: to open files in JupyterLab, find information in a notebook, modify cells in a notebook, change settings in the JupyterLab UI, etc. Then they were interviewed about their experience completing the tasks and about JupyterLab in general.
```

## What was tested

**Operating systems:** iOS, Mac OS Monterey, Windows 10, Windows 11

**Browsers:** Chrome, Firefox, Opera GX, Safari

**Assistive tech:** Built-in large cursor and pointer operating system settings, customized operating system shortcuts, Dragon Professional (speech recognition software), in-browser contrast adjustments, in-browser focus styling adjustments, Mac OS Zoom (built-in screen magnifier), mobile device, split keyboard, [sticky keys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sticky_keys)

**Interface:** Participant browser and [preset environment in The Littlest JupyterHub](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/JupyterLab-user-testing#jupyterlab-user-testing-environment) running JupyterLab 3.6.1. 

**Sample size:** 7 participants

> **Method:** Combination of qualitative [usability testing](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-testing-101/) and [user interviews](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/user-interviews/)

Reviewer 2: Trying to read this quickly, I tripped over this line because when I see "combination of qualitative ..." my brain immediately thinks that the other side of the conjunction will be "quantitative." But I'm not sure how to change the phrase while also keeping it clear and succinct.

Author: How about

```suggestion
**Method:** Combination of [usability testing](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-testing-101/) and [user interviews](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/user-interviews/) resulting in qualitative data.
```

?

Reviewer 2: :+1:

**Team:** [Isabela Presedo-Floyd](https://github.com/isabela-pf), [Tania Allard](https://github.com/trallard/), [Stephannie Jimenez Gacha](https://github.com/steff456), and [Gabriel Fouasnon](https://github.com/gabalafou/) via [Quansight Labs](https://labs.quansight.org/)

> ## Limits

Reviewer 2: Maybe this section should be titled "Disclaimer"?

Author: I'm open to a title change. For context, I used `Limits` because I think it is closer to the terminology used in research settings. I could be wrong about this.

[Wikipedia describes disclaimers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disclaimer) as more focused on explicitly stating rights  and obligations, and I'm not sure what obligations we are clarifying here so it was not my default. Totally open if I'm reading too much into the words and this is the more standard term.

Reviewer: Maybe limitations is better

Reviewer 2: Ohhh, I was ignorant of the user research terminology. In that case, I would stick with the expected terminology.

Author: ```suggestion
## Limitations
```

> While this study provides insights into how JupyterLab may function for users of assistive technology, it is important to explicitly note limits and gaps in this specific study.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this study provides insights into how JupyterLab may function for users of assistive technology, it is important to explicitly note the limitations and gaps in this specific study.
```

- **We worked with a small sample size of seven participants.** These participants joined as a part of an open call, so they are self-selected. Facilitators did select from within the larger group to make sure participants had used Jupyter tools before and were in a region where we could send payment.

> - **None of the participants used a screen reader.** Screen readers are a prominent group of assistive tech and critical to test with, so an ideal sample would absolutely include them. Of the assistive tech used by participants in this study, none of them present notebook content back to their users in a strictly non-visual way. For example, a screen magnifier user does interact with the notebook very differently than someone working without magnification. But both screen magnifier users and default magnification users are using their vision to read what is on the screen; they are able to directly interact with visual information. A screen reader user would have that content interpreted by the screen reader and read to them; they are interacting with an interpretation of visual information which is often where major issues arise.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is very clear and well written.

> - **This study is not an attempt to determine JupyterLab’s compliance with any single accessibility standard.** These results are not an accessibility statement for JupyterLab, JupyterHub, or any related Jupyter projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **This study is not an attempt to determine JupyterLab’s conformance with any accessibility standard.** These results are not an accessibility statement for JupyterLab, JupyterHub, or any related Jupyter projects.
```
I'd like to suggest this rewording instead, I have come to realise this is a common confusion, and terms are often used interchangeably. So in the interest of all of us, using a common vocabulary:

- conformance: refers to expectations, standards, and policies that a particular company or product abides by (defined by the organisation itself or an external entity).
- compliance: requirements that an organisation **must** meet and are established by an external authority or governing jurisdiction. 

While compliance is a more formal and legal requirement, conformance is voluntary.

Example:
For JupyterLab to be legally compliant with the UK Government accessibility regulations, it would need to be WCAG conformant.

Author: My mistake.

### Navigation

- **The menu bar (File, Edit, and so on) was the most used [JupyterLab region](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/interface.html) other than working in the notebook.** It was also most participants’ first choice to search when a task was unfamiliar to them. The left sidebar was used second most. The notebook toolbar was used third most. No participants used the cell toolbar or status bar. No tasks required features that are by default in the right sidebar, so it should not be counted.
- **JupyterLab’s default focus styling needs to be improved.** Based only on the sessions, no regions appear have a designated [focus state](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/focus-visible.html). Some regions (like the file browser) have hover states that can be triggered by the keyboard and functionally tell users where their keyboard focus is. This is blatantly inaccessible because it prevents keyboard users from being able to tell where they are at JupyterLab at any given moment.

> - Many participants had to work to find things within the notebook (cells, headings, and outputs were requested throughout the test). They often navigated past their goal and had to start again. They rarely used features JupyterLab has to support navigating notebooks, like the [table of contents](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/toc.html) or [find](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/interface.html#searching) features. Only one participant used the table of contents; this participant explicitly praised it.

Reviewer 2: This is intriguing. I wonder what opportunity this presents for improvement.

> - **Allowing the browser to take precedence wherever possible matters.** Multiple participants had browser-level settings, like high contrast settings or customized focus indicators, to improve their experience on all web pages. Participants with browser-level settings wanted them to carry over to JupyterLab. No major issues of JupyterLab overriding these settings occurred during these sessions, but participants made a point to call out the importance and their relief that they could use the settings they needed during their session.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I'm genuinely surprised that JupyterLab doesn't override some of these browser-level settings. My impression so far of Lumino has been that it was coded defensively against relying too heavily on built-in browser functionality because of browser limitations and cross-browser differences.

Author: I was too! 

I have a feeling this may be mixed depending on how the user defines their own settings and that we essentially got lucky with participants who happened to have something compatible. We also may not have tripped all the right settings, ie. there was not as much keyboard shortcut behavior to compare.

### UI customization

> - **Participants cared about themes.** Of participants who immediately changed settings to make JupyterLab better for their needs, all but one took the time to change the theme. Participants who were not aware JupyterLab had multiple default themes and found out later in the session remarked positively.

Reviewer 2: Yay for @steff456's work!

> - **Adjusting all text’s font size and having JupyterLab subsequently reflow its content was highly desired.** This is beyond default JupyterLab’s current text adjustment capabilities, but it does mean that the font size settings we have now are on the right track. 

Reviewer 2: For full disclosure, it might be worth mentioning that this was a task that was specifically asked in the testing script.

Author: Good point, and made me be a little more clear about reflow. Thanks!

```suggestion
- **Adjusting all text’s font size and having JupyterLab subsequently reflow its content was highly desired.** This is beyond default JupyterLab’s current text adjustment capabilities, but it does mean that the font size settings we have now are on the right track. Full disclosure, the script explicitly asked participants to change font sizes via JupyterLab as a means of observing how they explored the interface for unfamiliar controls; this did not come up on it's own. The benefits of reflowing content did come up independent of script tasks.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Adjusting all text’s font size and having JupyterLab subsequently reflow its content was highly desired.** This is beyond default JupyterLab’s current text adjustment capabilities, but it does mean that our font size settings are on the right track. It is important. to note that the script explicitly asked participants to change font sizes via JupyterLab as a means of observing how they explored the interface for unfamiliar controls; this did not come up on its own. The benefits of reflowing content did come up independent of script tasks.
```

for whatever reason seeing that "full disclosure" feels off

Author: ```suggestion
- **Adjusting all text’s font size and having JupyterLab subsequently reflow its content was highly desired.** This is beyond default JupyterLab’s current text adjustment capabilities, but it does mean that our font size settings are on the right track. It is important to note that the script explicitly asked participants to change font sizes via JupyterLab as a means of observing how they explored the interface for unfamiliar controls; this did not come up on its own. The benefits of reflowing content did come up independent of script tasks.
```
Above suggestion with one typo fixed for easy commit.

> - **[Low color contrast](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html) was not a major blocker for participants to complete tasks, but it was unpleasant.** Some participants overwrote sections of JupyterLab’s default colors with their browser to remedy it, but that is specialized knowledge not available to all possible users. The biggest issues arose when reading code; the syntax highlighting had particularly poor contrast or color combinations that were not distinct to participants.

Reviewer 2: Syntax highlighting... major opportunity for improvement.

### Notebook

- **Notebook structure and content does impact participant experience.** This means authors have the power to make working in JupyterLab more accessible even before changes can be made to JupyterLab itself. For our sessions, we received positive feedback on the [NumPy Tutorial notebook](https://numpy.org/numpy-tutorials/content/save-load-arrays.html)). Kudos to the NumPy Tutorials and wider documentation team!

> - **This study did not test a long or mixed content notebook.** Participants mentioned that there was nothing in this notebook they were wholesale not able to access, though the default styling sometimes made it harder to read. We did not test a notebook with images, plots, or widgets, which in other notebook interfaces have proven difficult.

Reviewer 2: Would it be possible to linkify "have proven difficult" to some evidence?

Author: Yes, thanks for asking! Though I do not have good written evidence on widgets from another test; that one's been more experiential. I'll remove it.

```suggestion
- **This study did not test a long or mixed content notebook.** Participants mentioned that there was nothing in this notebook they were wholesale not able to access, though the default styling sometimes made it harder to read. We did not test a notebook with images, plots, or other interactive notebook outputs, [which in other notebook interfaces have proven difficult](https://github.com/Iota-School/notebooks-for-all/blob/main/user-tests/2-content/results.md#images).
```

> - **Markdown headings were indispensable in keeping participants and facilitators in the same place.**

Reviewer 2: This.

- **The width of a document, notebook or otherwise, and length of code lines impacts magnification users.** Wider or longer sections require more horizontal movement. This is taxing and increases the likelihood of missing information. 

> - A majority of participants were more familiar with different notebook interfaces than JupyterLab. **The notebook file was the common ground for all.** Participants expected the notebook to behave the same regardless of interface.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this is the most crucial aspect of development on JupyterLab. Which Jupyter Notebook UI out there becomes the reference?

Reviewer: I believe the current notebook format (and schema) and how the different interfaces sit on top of this are intentionally decoupled to allow different tools to emerge (and thus different UIs and representations). 
In this case, the reference is the notebook format rather than the UI.

## Comparing assistive tech and non-assistive tech experiences

> Because we had participants who were using assistive tech and participants were not using assistive tech, we were able to observe some of the user experience differences between the two groups. Many of these comparisons highlight some of the disparities and impacts of having an inaccessible interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we had participants who were using assistive tech and participants who were not using assistive tech, we could observe some of the user experience differences between the two groups. Many of these comparisons highlight the disparities and impacts of having an inaccessible interface.
```

The ease with which participants reported feeling at completing tasks was roughly split; this does not account for variations in familiarity with JupyterLab, a metric we did not quantitatively collect. Participants not using assistive tech more frequently expressed all positive sentiments about the ease of a task. “Intuitive” and “easy to learn” were phrases that came up repeatedly. Participants using assistive tech still did express positive sentiments, but they gave more mixed positive and negative feedback. Many times the negative feedback was hedged with their report of a workaround that they knew they could fall back on if needed, but that completing tasks “might not be possible” or “takes a long time” and can be “tiring” is telling. Even when they were completing tasks they weren’t familiar with, this kind of language simply did not come up with participants who did not use assistive tech during their session.

> As for the time it took to complete tasks those using assistive tech during a session took roughly twice as long to complete tasks as those not using assistive tech. Multiple factors could contribute to a participant using assistive tech needing longer to complete the task. Some are less directly JupyterLab’s doing: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As for the time it took to complete tasks, those using assistive tech during a session took roughly twice as long to complete tasks as those not using assistive tech. Multiple factors could contribute to a participant using assistive tech needing longer to complete the task. Some are less directly JupyterLab’s doing: 
```

- Keyboard navigation frequently requires more interactions than mouse navigation.
- Screen magnifiers show less on a screen at a time and frequently require more interactions to see equivalent areas as a result.
- The delay for dictating navigation may be longer than the delay for thinking before moving a mouse. 

While these are not exclusively JupyterLab problems, JupyterLab still can provide better support. But JupyterLab also slowed assistive tech users down with 

> - Weak navigation support for the large number of distinct regions in the interface

Reviewer 2: I'm glad to see that this aligns with the work I've been doing.

- Difficult to read controls (most frequently small and/or low contrast areas like cell prompts or syntax highlighting)

> - [keyboard traps](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/no-keyboard-trap.html)

Reviewer 2: and this aligns! :)

> - Poor or no visible focus states

Reviewer 2: and this aligns too!

- **Including the [command palette](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user/commands.html#command-palette) in user-facing accessibility documentation.** The command palette is not explicitly an accessibility feature (and at time of writing has known accessibility issues), but it proved a helpful feature for some participants. Several participants were unaware of the command palette and could have benefited from it. Participants used it to 
     - search features and actions they could take (ie. it became a first round of documentation when they didn’t know how to complete the task)
     - to refer to keyboard shortcuts
     - to complete actions with less keystrokes than other routes (ie. it takes less strokes to navigate via keyboard from an open notebook to a shortcut-opened command palette than it does to move tab by tab from an open notebook to the menu bar)

>      - and to informally navigate large areas of  JupyterLab (ie. participants knew where in JupyterLab they wanted to go and would select a command from the command palette solely because they knew would move their focus closer to the desired area)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - and to informally navigate large areas of JupyterLab (ie. participants knew where in JupyterLab they wanted to go and would select a command from the command palette solely because they knew would move their focus closer to the desired area)
```

> - **Drawing attention to UI customization options in user-facing accessibility documentation.** Font size adjustments (UI Font Size, Editor Font Size, etc.), default themes, UI modes (Simple Mode, Presentation Mode, etc.). Participants were almost entirely unaware of these features, and a majority of them reacted positively when they discovered or were told to use them during a task. 

Reviewer 2: 🐦 @dannyjohnson2050, I think this is directly related to your internship work, so just calling it to your attention, in case you're interested

### JupyterLab experience changes

> Based on direct feedback from participants and observed behavior, we’ve found multiple impactful ways to adjust JupyterLab’s user experience with the needs of disabled users as a priority. With the high-level tasks completed during these sessions, problems encountered and specific solutions will be similarly high level. Ironing out experience and implementation details is outside the scope of this work, but is necessary in the future. Overall, JupyterLab’s user experience would benefit from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on direct feedback from participants and observed behavior, we’ve found multiple impactful ways to align JupyterLab’s user experience with the needs of disabled users as a priority. With the high-level tasks completed during these sessions, problems encountered and specific solutions will be similarly high level. 

Ironing out experience and implementation details is outside the scope of this work but is necessary for the future. Overall, JupyterLab’s user experience would benefit from the following:
```

#### Improved keyboard navigation support 

Coarse grain (moving between large JupyterLab sections like the main document area, menu bar, side bars, etc.) navigation needs much more attention. Within keyboard navigation, the following subsets stood out.

- **The table of contents is useful for navigating notebooks, but only one participant was aware and used it.** Participants who did not use the table of contents generally took more time to find cells within a notebook and often moved past their desired goal by accident. This brings the discoverability of such a useful feature into question.

> - **The command palette was one of the more popular choices for navigating through large areas of JuptyerLab in addition to completing actions within the notebook.** Because the command palette is not currently designed with navigation in mind, this proved a hit-or-miss solution. Explicitly adding commands to move keyboard focus to major JupyterLab regions or specific features could provide discoverable and effective keyboard navigation on the highest level. The ability to call the command palette with a keyboard shortcut while doing any other task in JupyterLab was praised. 

Reviewer 2: Eeee, I **really** want to work on my command-palette-as-skip-link idea, and fix the focus and other accessibility-related issues in the command palette

- **Having an interface exclusively for coarse grain navigation.** While navigation may still be improved within other areas of JupyterLab (like the command palette recommendation above), navigation is critical enough to warrant its own attention. Adding a central location to change keyboard focus between the menu bar, main document area, status bar, both side bars, and possibly Settings would remove the most major keyboard navigation issues that appeared in this series of tests. In past versions of JupyterLab, this idea has been touched upon with the skiplink—a prompt that allows users to move focus immediately to the main document area if they begin tabbing from the start of JupyterLab. 

#### More UI customization 

> This includes the discoverability of existing UI customization features and the addition of more or more detailed customization options. It is important to note that UI customization is most likely to support disabled users who still have some amount of vision available to them which was the case with this test’s participants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This includes the discoverability of existing UI customization features and the addition of more, or more detailed, customization options. It is important to note that UI customization is most likely to support disabled users who still have some amount of vision available to them which was the case with this test’s participants.
```

> - **JupyterLab does have existing UI customization features by default.** Light versus dark themes, editor font size, and layout modes (Simple Mode, Presentation Mode) all allow users choices to set up JupyterLab in a way that may work better for them. Because these features require users to navigate multiple areas of JupyterLab to get to and do not require any domain-specific knowledge, the test script asked participants to engage with some of these features. The overwhelming response was one of positive surprise. Participants wanted to use these features and did not know they existed. Light/dark themes were the most likely to be known, while font size adjustments weren’t known by any participant. Screen magnifier users and other low-vision participants emphasized how helpful font size adjustment would be for them and that they wished they knew about them before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **JupyterLab does have existing UI customization features by default.** Light versus dark themes, editor font size, and layout modes (Simple Mode, Presentation Mode) all give users choices to set up JupyterLab in a way that may work better for them. Because getting to these features requires users to navigate multiple areas of JupyterLab, and they do not require any domain-specific knowledge, the test script asked participants to engage with some of these features. The overwhelming response was one of positive surprise. Participants wanted to use these features and did not know they existed. Light/dark themes were the most likely to be known, while font size adjustments weren’t known by any participant. Screen magnifier users and other low-vision participants emphasized how helpful font size adjustment would be for them and that they wished they knew about them before.
```

> - **JupyterLab’s default—meaning without the addition of extensions—UI customization capabilities are limited.** In conversation with participants and in observing the issues they faced, we’ve determined additional UI customization features that would help them better use JupyterLab. Entirely new customization options include selecting from multiple syntax highlighting themes, being able to select major button colors (like the `--jp-brand-color` family), being able to select state colors (like the warning, error, and info color families), and to set a maximum width for documents in the main document area. Additions to existing customization options include more themes beyond light and dark modes, to be able to change all text sizes in JupyterLab, to be able to select text sizes directly rather than in opaque increments (ie. to set font sizes to a point, pixel, or percent value rather than selecting menu items with no feedback), and to assign other or additional indicators for the status of running or freshly completed code cells.

Reviewer 2: I seem to recall there being talk at QuantStack at some point about some kind of "theme editor" extension. I wonder if anything like that is in the works

> - **JupyterLab’s default—meaning without the addition of extensions—UI customization capabilities are limited.** In conversation with participants and in observing the issues they faced, we’ve determined additional UI customization features that would help them better use JupyterLab. Entirely new customization options include selecting from multiple syntax highlighting themes, being able to select major button colors (like the `--jp-brand-color` family), being able to select state colors (like the warning, error, and info color families), and to set a maximum width for documents in the main document area. Additions to existing customization options include more themes beyond light and dark modes, to be able to change all text sizes in JupyterLab, to be able to select text sizes directly rather than in opaque increments (ie. to set font sizes to a point, pixel, or percent value rather than selecting menu items with no feedback), and to assign other or additional indicators for the status of running or freshly completed code cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **JupyterLab’s default—meaning UI customization capabilities are limited without adding extensions.** In conversation with participants and observing their issues, we’ve determined additional UI customization features that would help them better use JupyterLab. Entirely new customization options include selecting from multiple syntax highlighting themes, being able to select major button colors (like the `--jp-brand-color` family), being able to select state colors (like the warning, error, and info color families), and to set a maximum width for documents in the main document area. Additions to existing customization options include more themes beyond light and dark modes, the ability to change all text sizes in JupyterLab, the ability to select text sizes directly rather than in opaque increments (i.e., to set font sizes to a point, pixel, or percent value rather than selecting menu items with no feedback), and to assign other or additional indicators for the status of running or freshly completed code cells.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- **JupyterLab’s default UI customization capabilities are limited without adding extensions.** In conversation with participants and observing their issues, we’ve determined additional UI customization features that would help them better use JupyterLab. Entirely new customization options include selecting from multiple syntax highlighting themes, being able to select major button colors (like the `--jp-brand-color` family), being able to select state colors (like the warning, error, and info color families), and to set a maximum width for documents in the main document area. Additions to existing customization options include more themes beyond light and dark modes, the ability to change all text sizes in JupyterLab, the ability to select text sizes directly rather than in opaque increments (i.e., to set font sizes to a point, pixel, or percent value rather than selecting menu items with no feedback), and to assign other or additional indicators for the status of running or freshly completed code cells.
```

Above suggestion with one typo fixed for easy commit.

#### Different options for feedback on cell status 

> **Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and favicon changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Quick to run code cells with a cell output—like the majority of cells run during these tests— tend to make this a trivial issue, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted and non-sighted users. Fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual.** The cell prompt and favicon changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Quick to run code cells with a cell output—like the majority of cells run during these tests— tend to make this a trivial issue, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted and non-sighted users. Fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running. 
```

> **Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and favicon changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Quick to run code cells with a cell output—like the majority of cells run during these tests— tend to make this a trivial issue, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted and non-sighted users. Fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running. 

Reviewer 2: I don't know what you mean by favicon

Author: Good to know! Link added.

```suggestion
**Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and [favicon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Favicon) changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Quick to run code cells with a cell output—like the majority of cells run during these tests— tend to make this a trivial issue, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted and non-sighted users. Fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running. 
```

Reviewer 2: Sorry. My question wasn't clear. I know what a favicon is generally. My confusion was that until just now (I went and tested), I had no idea that the JupyterLab favicon changes to an hourglass when a cell is running. I also just checked Colab and realized that its favicon grays out while a cell is running. Is it a common web app pattern to reflect app status in the favicon? I guess I've seen this pattern used in chat apps, but I guess I've rarely seen the favicon change anywhere else.

Instead of linking to the Favicon Wikipedia page, I would link to the JupyterLab docs, but I don't see this behavior documented there (except in the changelog), so maybe linking to one of the issues or PRs would be good—maybe this PR [comment about the JupyterLab favicon that has pictures/videos](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/pull/4361#issuecomment-385454613). 

Or maybe the kernel status reflected in the favicon is already common knowledge, and I'm just late to the party. Maybe a second opinion here? or just your best judgment :)

Author: > Is it a common web app pattern to reflect app status in the favicon?

I don't actually know. Off the top of my head I can't think of others that do it other than adding notifications symbols over the normal favicon.

> I would link to the JupyterLab docs, but I don't see this behavior documented there (except in the changelog)

Good to know it wasn't just me then! 😆 

```suggestion
**Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and [favicon changes](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/pull/4361) rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Quick to run code cells with a cell output—like the majority of cells run during these tests— tend to make this a trivial issue, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted and non-sighted users. Fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running. 
```

> Or maybe the kernel status reflected in the favicon is already common knowledge, and I'm just late to the party. 

Not all participants were aware of it, so I think it's good to clarify. My personal guess would be that it's not known by everyone. I'm glad you called it out.

Thank you for finding that link!

Reviewer: ha! I have been using notebooks/lab for years and I **never** noticed the change to an hourglass 🫠 I suppose its placement is not an obvious place to search for "status" cues

> **Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and favicon changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Quick to run code cells with a cell output—like the majority of cells run during these tests— tend to make this a trivial issue, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted and non-sighted users. Fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running. 

Reviewer 2: This paragraph needs some rethinking. Without a deep read, it reads to me almost like you're contradicting yourself, like so:

1. Quick-to-run code cells make this trivial
2. But not trivial for unsighted users
3. But trivial for sighted users

Maybe drop the bit about quick-to-run cells? Or add it as an afterthought at the end of the paragraph?

Author: Here's a first try to clean it up.

```suggestion
**Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and favicon changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Because fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running, it marks a drastic experience difference for sighted versus blind or visually impaired users. A cell's run time can impact the degree of disruption.
```

Reviewer 2: Much clearer 😀

Just wondering, is "experience difference" a compound noun that's used commonly in user research? It slowed the sentence down for me, but I'm wondering if that's just because I'm not immersed in the common terms. My inclination would otherwise be to omit "experience": "it marks a drastic difference for..."

Author: I think that's a good edit. As far as I'm aware, that is not a domain specific term. I added it only to specify what kind of difference.

```suggestion
**Current default JupyterLab feedback for notebook cell status is exclusively visual**; the cell prompt and favicon changes rely on users being able to see the icons, especially since these changes are not surfaced to the user unless their focus happens to already be on those icons when they change. This makes knowing the status of a cell difficult to impossible for users who cannot look at the screen in full. Because fully sighted users can quickly verify the status of a cell in two different places, go about other work while waiting, and more easily verify when a cell has completed running, it marks a drastic difference for sighted versus blind or visually impaired users. A cell's run time can impact the degree of disruption.
```

> Participants who could not easily see or could not see the staus indicators at all (since they are small and relatively low contrast) relied on prior experience with notebooks, gut instinct about how long that section of code usually takes to run, or the appearance of a cell output to check a cell’s status. Having at least one non-visual option (like an audio indicator) or a visual option that would represent itself in a timely manner for assistive tech (like a notification) could provide users with the support they want. Making these options customizable would be important as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Participants who could not easily see or could not see the status indicators at all (since they are small and relatively low contrast) relied on prior experience with notebooks, gut instinct about how long that section of code usually takes to run, or the appearance of a cell output to check a cell’s status. Having at least one non-visual option (like an audio indicator) or a visual option that would represent itself promptly for assistive tech (like a notification) could provide users the support they want. Making these options customizable would be necessary as well.
```

#### Flexible command palette search/filter behavior

> Because several participants relied heavily on the command palette to complete tasks, the limit of its filtering arose several times. From the user end, the command palette feels like it searches only for direct matches within the command list for whatever the user types in. If a user knows exactly what they are looking for, they often have success. Participants were sometimes able to quickly and flawlessly locate a desired command. But when they were exploring JupyterLab’s command options, unable to remember the exact name of a command, made a typo, or were unfamiliar with a task many participants had to give up using the command palette in order to complete the task. Depending on the assistive tech they use, typos can also be nontrivial to detect for blind or visually impaired users. Having a fuzzy search or other typo/error support rather than only the direct filter would help the command palette continue to be the boon many participants wanted it to be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because several participants relied heavily on the command palette to complete tasks, the limit of its filtering arose several times. From the user end, the command palette feels like it searches only for direct matches within the command list for whatever the user types in. If users know precisely what they are looking for, they often succeed. Participants were sometimes able to quickly and flawlessly locate a desired command. But when they were exploring JupyterLab’s command options, unable to remember the exact name of a command, made a typo, or were unfamiliar with a task, many participants had to give up using the command palette to complete the task. Depending on their assistive tech, typos can also be nontrivial to detect for blind or visually impaired users. Having a fuzzy search or other typo/error support rather than only the direct filter would help the command palette continue to be the boon many participants wanted it to be.
```

## For future tests

> Reflecting on the findings and gaps in this set of tests, the following are questions to revisit in the future.

Author: ```suggestion
No test can answer all questions. For this series, the focus was on gathering baseline experience information for common notebook-related tasks in JupyterLab as navigated by disabled participants. In order to have a more comprehensive understanding of accessibility status in JupyterLab and in the notebook file, we would need to make a point to test more and different questions. Reflecting on the findings and gaps in this set of tests, the following are questions we could revisit in the future.
```

- How might a screen reader user complete common notebook tasks in JupyterLab?

> - What are JupyterLab’s strengths and weaknesses when it comes to authoring notebooks and other documents with assistive tech?

Reviewer 2: Because authoring wasn't tested or...?

Author: Yep! We did test some small amount of editing by having participants type in cells, but I would hypothesize typing in existing cells is a different experience from having to write a notebook from scratch.

Reviewer 2: Would it be useful to drill down, then, to that level of detail, as in something like the following?

```suggestion
- What are JupyterLab’s strengths and weaknesses when it comes to authoring notebooks and other documents with assistive tech? The script used in this test asked participants to edit existing cells, but did not ask them to start a notebook from scratch.
```

- What more can we learn about navigating JupyterLab, especially with a variety of assistive tech? What are good examples of navigation that support disabled users?

> - What are the full range of notebook cell output types and what feedback to disabled users have on each type?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- What are the full range of notebook cell output types and what feedback do disabled users have on each type?
```

Do you mean specifically blind users?

Author: I was still thinking of a sample with people who have different disabilities—including but not limited to blindness— when I wrote this. Does that seem to not match the question?

Reviewer 2: This question felt to me like it was calling back to the earlier paragraph about the drastic experience difference between sighted and non-sighted users with respect to cell status. 

To make the question less abstract, my brain went: I think this question says, let's dig deeper into how blind users figure out cell status in JupyterLab.

Author: Okay, I think the thing that may be throwing you overall in this section is that I would consider it callback-less. Most if not all of these questions I didn't write thinking of something I mentioned above, I wrote them thinking of things we didn't do that I would want to know for all the times people ask me "So is JupyterLab accessible?" A call back approach may be more suited, though. 

I can add a question about better understanding the different ways people find out cell status. I think I'd prefer not to remove this one, though, because the truth is we still haven't tested things like common widgets used in Jupyter notebooks, LaTeX outputs, and some other cell output types.

Author: ```suggestion
- What are the full range of notebook cell output types and what feedback to disabled users have on each type?
- How do disabled users interact with cell status features? Where does it fail them? What do they do instead?
```

Reviewer 2: You nailed it: it being "callback-less" is what was throwing me, especially because to my brain it _seemed_ that some items in the list were callbacks while others were not. Anyway, don't worry too much about it. It only tripped me up a little bit. It didn't prevent me from making sense of the section or the document as a whole.

> - What is the real time collaboration experience in JupyterLab like for assistive tech users? This question requires JupyterLab collaboration modes to be more stable before it can be tested.

Reviewer 2: This seems to come out of nowhere.

Author: That makes sense; it isn't mentioned in these tests or related work. I put it because collaboration modes have been a discussion in the community for a long time now and seems to hold a lot of interest for people. I wanted to point out that we have not done a lot of user experience work for the feature(s) that have been added for collaboration, let alone accessibility-focused user experience. 

If it seems too jarring, it can be removed.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> As mentioned in the Limits section, the sample we were able to test with for these sessions was not as comprehensive of varied disabilities and assistive tech as we would like. Recruitment for these sessions was done within existing JupyterLab community spaces and was mostly self-selected; future tests would likely benefit from a more selective sample and outreach to disability communities where appropriate. This should be done with careful consideration as the history of people who make products interrupting disability communities and asking for labor is a fraught one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the Limits section, the sample we were able to test with for these sessions was not as comprehensive of varied disabilities and assistive tech as we would like. Recruitment for these sessions was done within existing JupyterLab community spaces and was mostly self-selected; future tests would likely benefit from a more selective sample and outreach to disability communities where appropriate. This should be done with careful consideration as the history of people who make products interrupting disability communities and asking for labor is a fraught one.
```

Should a bit more be said here? or resource linked to? is it just a matter of fair compensation? or something else?

Author: To be honest, I did not say too much because I think this is a complicated topic I do not feel personally equipped to articulate properly. I would like to link to something, but I'm not personally aware of a link that discusses it. It also seemed unfair to potential readers to ignore it. I can easily imagine a genuine and enthusiastic person reaching out with the best intentions and still causing harm, so I felt like I had to say something.

Compensation (or a frequent request for unpaid labor) is definitely a factor. I do not think it's the entirety of the tension. 

What kind of information were you expecting in this section? I can see what I can do to provide it.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I wasn't sure myself whether more should be said here. I think it's okay as is. Controversy (fraught history) tends to be interesting, so I think this paragraph will pique readers' curiosity. I suspect that a lot of readers would want to know more. But it's not the point of this document, so if they want to know more, they can use a search engine, or talk to people

Reviewer: I think we can leave this as is without needing more detail.
Ethical and fair user testing mainly when focusing on marginalised groups can be challenging due to many reasons beyond compensation.

> As mentioned in the Limits section, the sample we were able to test with for these sessions was not as comprehensive of varied disabilities and assistive tech as we would like. Recruitment for these sessions was done within existing JupyterLab community spaces and was mostly self-selected; future tests would likely benefit from a more selective sample and outreach to disability communities where appropriate. This should be done with careful consideration as the history of people who make products interrupting disability communities and asking for labor is a fraught one.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if moving this paragraph to the top and mentioning that certain features with huge accessibility implications (like RTC) were not tested. I think that would make it easier for the reader to understand why some of the things are in the list. Does that make sense?

Author: I can see an argument for it. Let me think on that one.

Reviewer 2: Right now my brain outlines this section as so:

- section heading: For future tests
- list of questions to explore further
- paragraph about the need to improve the selection sample
- paragraph about the need to use other user research methodologies

Looking at it this way, I take back my suggestion about moving the paragraph in the third bullet point (selection sample) to the top of the section.

However, because there are some things in the list that the preceding parts of the document did not touch upon, or perhaps only vaguely touched upon, it might make sense to insert some more wording between the section heading and the list, so as not to interrupt the reader's flow.

Let me go through the list of questions, one by one, trying to give you a window into my inner reader voice, showing which questions felt like they were in conversation with previous parts of the document versus ones which felt disconnected:

- Screen readers. My inner voice: this seems in conversation with the "Limits" section, specifically the part about not having any screen reader participants
- Authoring. Me: Unclear. disconnected? but maybe in conversation with the "notebook" section, since it seems that much of the findings were about users consuming a notebook rather than producing one
- Navigating. Me: this is definitely in conversation with multiple parts of the document, including the navigation findings section, as well as the suggestions for improvement
- Cell output types and feedback. Me: vague. in conversation with... the part about cell status and the drastic experience difference between non-sighted versus sighted users?
- RTC. Me: disconnected.

Hope that helps!

Author: I appreciate the explanation. If you are looking for relation between this section and the rest of the document, I would agree it's mostly not there. 

I'll add a suggestion with some changes to the intro to see if that clarifies. I have to add it in another comment though to capture the right lines to change. Thanks!

Edit: [here's a comment of potential context addition](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/JupyterLab-user-testing/pull/10#discussion_r1264086174).

> A usability testing style script was chosen for this testing session because of the the need for scoped and actionable accessibility feedback in JupyterLab, project timeline, available team, and other logistical constraints. After these results, we can recommend that observational/[field studies](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/field-studies/) would be useful in understanding the broader, holistic accessibility issues within JupyterLab’s user experience that a study like this is not suited to survey.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A usability testing style script was chosen for this testing session because of the need for scoped and actionable accessibility feedback in JupyterLab, project timeline, available team, and other logistical constraints. After these results, we can recommend that observational/[field studies](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/field-studies/) would be useful in understanding the broader, holistic accessibility issues within JupyterLab’s user experience that a study like this is not suited to survey.
```

- What more can we learn about navigating JupyterLab, especially with a variety of assistive tech? What are good examples of navigation that support disabled users?
- What are the full range of notebook cell output types and what feedback to disabled users have on each type?
- What is the real time collaboration experience in JupyterLab like for assistive tech users? This question requires JupyterLab collaboration modes to be more stable before it can be tested.

As mentioned in the Limits section, the sample we were able to test with for these sessions was not as comprehensive of varied disabilities and assistive tech as we would like. Recruitment for these sessions was done within existing JupyterLab community spaces and was mostly self-selected; future tests would likely benefit from a more selective sample and outreach to disability communities where appropriate. This should be done with careful consideration as the history of people who make products interrupting disability communities and asking for labor is a fraught one.

> A usability testing style script was chosen for this testing session because of the need for scoped and actionable accessibility feedback in JupyterLab, project timeline, available team, and other logistical constraints. After these results, we can recommend that observational/[field studies](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/field-studies/) would be useful in understanding the broader, holistic accessibility issues within JupyterLab’s user experience that a study like this is not suited to survey.

Author: …aaand adding funding notes back in at the bottom.

```suggestion
A usability testing style script was chosen for this testing session because of the need for scoped and actionable accessibility feedback in JupyterLab, project timeline, available team, and other logistical constraints. After these results, we can recommend that observational/[field studies](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/field-studies/) would be useful in understanding the broader, holistic accessibility issues within JupyterLab’s user experience that a study like this is not suited to survey.

## Funding

This work was funded by a [Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Essential Open Source Software for Science grant](https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/proposals/inclusive-and-accessible-scientific-computing-in-the-jupyter-ecosystem/). The [full grant proposal can be found on the jupyter/accessibility repository](https://github.com/jupyter/accessibility/blob/da6db43da092255c205ce1603d0d10b1f51c131b/docs/funding/Inclusive_and_Accessible_Scientific_Computing_in_Jupyter_Ecosystem_SUBMITTED_PROPOSAL.pdf).

```

#### Flexible command palette search/filter behavior

Because several participants relied heavily on the command palette to complete tasks, the limit of its filtering arose several times. From the user end, the command palette feels like it searches only for direct matches within the command list for whatever the user types in. If users know precisely what they are looking for, they often succeed. Participants were sometimes able to quickly and flawlessly locate a desired command. But when they were exploring JupyterLab’s command options, unable to remember the exact name of a command, made a typo, or were unfamiliar with a task, many participants had to give up using the command palette to complete the task. Depending on their assistive tech, typos can also be nontrivial to detect for blind or visually impaired users. Having a fuzzy search or other typo/error support rather than only the direct filter would help the command palette continue to be the boon many participants wanted it to be.

> ## For future tests

Author: ```suggestion
## Potential Future Work
```

- How might a screen reader user complete common notebook tasks in JupyterLab?
- What are JupyterLab’s strengths and weaknesses when it comes to authoring notebooks and other documents with assistive tech? The script used in this test asked participants to edit existing cells, but did not ask them to start a notebook from scratch.
- What more can we learn about navigating JupyterLab, especially with a variety of assistive tech? What are good examples of navigation that support disabled users?
- What are the full range of notebook cell output types and what feedback to disabled users have on each type?
- How do disabled users interact with cell status features? Where does it fail them? What do they do instead?

> As mentioned in the Limits section, the sample we were able to test with for these sessions was not as comprehensive of varied disabilities and assistive tech as we would like. Recruitment for these sessions was done within existing JupyterLab community spaces and was mostly self-selected; future tests would likely benefit from a more selective sample and outreach to disability communities where appropriate. This should be done with careful consideration as the history of people who make products interrupting disability communities and asking for labor is a fraught one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the Limitations section, the sample we were able to test with for these sessions was not as comprehensive of varied disabilities and assistive tech as we would like. Recruitment for these sessions was done within existing JupyterLab community spaces and was mostly self-selected; future tests would likely benefit from a more selective sample and outreach to disability communities where appropriate. This should be done with careful consideration as the history of people who make products interrupting disability communities and asking for labor is a fraught one.
```
